IPL STRATEGY INTELLIGENCE
PROJECT WALKTHROUGH
====================

Purpose
-------

This file explains how the repository works from raw cricket records through the data pipeline, application, analytics tools, retrieval, and prediction. It is a technical project guide, not the public project landing page. README.md is the short GitHub overview.


1. PRODUCT OVERVIEW
-------------------

IPL Strategy Intelligence is a cricket analytics data platform with a local AI-assisted decision-support application. Its data engineering layer transforms match and ball-by-ball records into structured Silver and Gold data. The application presents analytics and accepts natural-language questions. One IPL Strategy Agent selects deterministic analytics, Gold-backed semantic retrieval, or an optional chase-state model based on the question.

The key responsibility split is:

  - PySpark validates, enriches, and aggregates source data.
  - Gold tables hold reusable analytics at a defined grain.
  - Python analytics tools perform exact filtering and calculations on local snapshots.
  - Qdrant finds relevant text summaries created from Gold data.
  - The scikit-learn model estimates a chase outcome from explicit live-state inputs.
  - Ollama plans tool use and explains returned evidence.
  - Streamlit is the analyst-facing interface.

The language model is not expected to invent or calculate structured statistics. Tools own the values; the model explains their meaning and limitations.


2. END-TO-END ARCHITECTURE
-------------------------

Source CSVs
    -> PySpark source validation and standardization
    -> Silver delivery-grain records enriched with match metadata
    -> Eight Gold analytics outputs
    -> Local Parquet snapshots and overview CSVs
    -> Streamlit analytics and the strategy-agent tools

For the AI question path:

Question
    -> IPLStrategyAgent plans which sources are useful
    -> Gold analytics query, Qdrant retrieval, and/or chase model
    -> Tool evidence, source labels, and limitations are combined
    -> Ollama produces an evidence-grounded explanation
    -> Streamlit displays answer, metrics, sources, and tool trace

The data pipeline and local app run as separate layers. Spark is responsible for building Silver and Gold in its configured Volume. The Streamlit application reads exported snapshots under data/gold and does not connect to a Spark cluster. RAG vectors are generated locally from those snapshots. When Gold snapshots change, the local RAG index should be rebuilt.


3. SOURCE DATA AND GRAIN
------------------------

The pipeline expects these files in its configured Raw directory:

  Match_Info.csv
    Match date, competing teams, toss, result, winner, venue, and other match data.

  Ball_By_Ball_Match_Data.csv
    Delivery events including match ID, innings, over, ball number, batter,
    bowler, batter runs, extras, total runs, wicket and dismissal information.

  teams_info.csv
    Team reference information.

  2024_players_details.csv
    Player roster used to validate names appearing in delivery data.

The intended event grain is one row per source delivery. Match metadata is attached by joining the delivery ID to the match number. The pipeline hashes all source delivery fields to build a stable row identity. It does not rely on match + innings + over + ball being unique, because the supplied data has tied-match Super Over collisions.


4. SOURCE CHECKS AND SILVER PROCESSING
--------------------------------------

pipeline/ipl_pipeline.py reads the CSVs, standardizes types, validates inputs, enriches delivery rows with match metadata, and handles incremental Delta writes. pipeline/quality.py contains the reusable checks.

The checks include:

  - Required input columns and expected data types.
  - Null checks on critical match and delivery fields.
  - Unique match IDs and unique full-row delivery hashes.
  - Delivery match IDs must resolve to match metadata.
  - Batter, bowler, non-striker, and player-out names must resolve to the roster
    by normalized full name or first-initial-plus-surname.
  - Observed calendar seasons must not contain gaps between first and last year.
  - Delivery row count must not change beyond a configured threshold from the
    prior pipeline run.

Silver is a typed delivery table with match date, team names, toss context,
winner, venue, innings and ball coordinates, batter/bowler identity, runs,
extras, wicket, dismissal, and batting team. The delivery hash allows exact
source rows to be merged consistently.


5. INCREMENTAL PROCESSING
-------------------------

The pipeline computes a match-level manifest. It fingerprints match metadata
and a sorted collection of hashes for that match's deliveries. On refresh, it
compares the current manifest to the saved manifest to find new or changed
matches. It recomputes those matches, merges their Silver rows, and updates the
manifest. Unchanged matches do not need to be fully reprocessed.

This makes pipeline reruns safer and more efficient than blindly appending all
records. The delivery key supports idempotent upserts; the match manifest
determines the change scope.


6. GOLD ANALYTICS PRODUCTS
--------------------------

The pipeline creates eight outputs:

  player_matchups
    Grain: batter and bowler. Measures: matches, legal balls faced, batter
    runs, strike rate, credited dismissals, and boundary runs. Wides and
    no-balls are not counted as legal balls faced. Run-outs, retired hurt, and
    obstructing-the-field dismissals are not charged as bowler dismissals.

  player_form
    Grain: batter. Measures: matches, total runs, average runs per match,
    fours, and sixes.

  team_performance
    Grain: canonical franchise. Measures: matches played, wins, and win
    percentage. Known franchise aliases are normalized, such as Bangalore and
    Bengaluru, Delhi Daredevils and Delhi Capitals, and Kings XI Punjab and
    Punjab Kings.

  toss_analysis
    Grain: toss decision. Measures: matches, toss-winner victories, and win
    percentage.

  venue_strategy
    Grain: source venue label in pipeline output. Measures: match count,
    average first- and second-innings scores, and chase-win percentage.

  phase_analysis
    Grain: Powerplay, Middle, or Death. Measures: deliveries, runs, fours,
    sixes, and wickets. The pipeline detects whether overs are zero-based or
    one-based before assigning phases.

  top_batsmen
    Batter leaderboard by total runs and matches played.

  top_bowlers
    Bowler wicket leaderboard excluding dismissal types that are not credited
    to the bowler.

The Spark job reconciles source delivery counts and batter runs through Silver
and Gold, checks team appearances, validates toss totals, and checks that Gold
business keys are present and unique. These controls catch common ingestion
and aggregation problems, but they cannot detect every semantic ambiguity in
the source encoding.


7. LOCAL DATA SNAPSHOT AND RELIABILITY
--------------------------------------

The local CSV files reviewed for this project contain 1,243 matches and
295,732 delivery rows, dated 2008-04-18 through 2026-05-31. The match IDs are
unique. Every delivery match ID joins to match metadata. No exact duplicate
delivery rows were found, and TotalRun equals BatsmanRun plus ExtrasRun on
every row. The 25 null winners correspond to 16 tied matches and 9 no-results.

The endpoint aligns with the official IPL 2026 Final on 31 May 2026:
https://www.iplt20.com/photos/final

The same CSV filenames are present in a public dataset repository updated on
2 June 2026:
https://github.com/ritesh-ojha/IPL-DATASET/commit/main

However, the local S3 objects have not been checksum-compared to that public
repository. The data's exact provenance is therefore not independently
verified. Describe it as locally checked, not as authoritative or perfect.

SUPER OVER COORDINATE LIMITATION

All 16 tied matches have Super Over deliveries represented with Innings = 2,
Overs = 0, reusing ball coordinates from the regular second innings. The CSV
does not contain an explicit Super Over indicator. These are real records and
are retained. Guessing which rows to delete or relabel would risk losing
valid data.

The ambiguity can affect regular second-innings totals, batter-bowler
matchups, and phase aggregates if they treat innings/over/ball coordinates as
unique regular deliveries. The chase trainer excludes tied matches because
they have no winner, but that does not repair the source representation for
other all-time aggregates. A corrected source with an explicit innings and
Super Over field is needed before claiming all affected statistics are exact.

TEAM IDENTITIES

The all-time dataset has 15 canonical franchise identities. These include
ten current franchises and historical franchises that were discontinued or
renamed. Fifteen is expected for multi-season history; deleting the historic
teams would remove valid results.

VENUE IDENTITIES

The Gold venue snapshot contains 60 source labels. Known spelling,
punctuation, and city-suffix variants normalize to 38 displayed venue
identities in the dashboard, analytics layer, and RAG documents. The
historical Sardar Patel Stadium, Motera label remains separate from Narendra
Modi Stadium so different ground eras are not silently merged. The original
Gold Parquet rows remain at source label grain.


8. ONE AGENT, MULTIPLE TOOLS
----------------------------

The Streamlit app loads IPLStrategyAgent from agentic/strategy_agent.py. This
is one tool-using agent, not a multi-agent architecture. It has a planner,
tool implementations, evidence handling, and answer generation. The planner
is a component of the agent, not another agent.

The planner asks the configured Ollama chat model to return a constrained
JSON plan containing:

  - Gold table names to query;
  - whether contextual RAG retrieval is useful;
  - whether chase prediction is requested.

Table names are checked against an allowlist. Local rules supplement and
validate the plan, including checking for supported table intent and
resolvable player matchup entities. If the planner fails, rule-based routing
is used and a limitation is shown. The system does not give the LLM arbitrary
database or shell access.

The tools are:

  Gold analytics
    GoldDataQueryTool loads local Parquet files with pandas. GoldAnalyticsTool
    resolves names and applies deterministic filters, returning source-labelled
    rows and scope notes.

  RAG retrieval
    Searches semantic documents derived from Gold summaries. It is useful for
    related context, not for exact calculations over raw deliveries.

  Chase prediction
    Calls a fitted scikit-learn model when a user supplies all required live
    state features in the question.

The agent combines evidence and sends it to Ollama for a natural-language
answer. The UI displays the answer, supporting metrics, source tables, tools
called, and caveats.


9. EXAMPLE QUESTION PATH
------------------------

Question: "Should we chase at Wankhede against CSK?"

  1. The planner and local rules identify a venue question, a team reference,
     and a request for strategy context.
  2. venue_strategy can return historical results across all teams at
     Wankhede. team_performance can return CSK's all-venue record.
  3. RAG may retrieve Gold-derived text about the selected venue or franchise.
  4. The evidence grain is checked: an all-venue CSK aggregate plus an
     all-team Wankhede aggregate does not equal CSK's Wankhede record.
  5. The live chase model cannot predict a current chase without score,
     remaining balls, wickets, current run rate, and required run rate.
  6. Ollama explains the historical evidence while the UI exposes the
     limitation. It should not imply that a live prediction was made.

This illustrates the actual agent value: deciding which evidence sources to
combine for a compound question, while respecting what those sources measure.


10. WHY BOTH ANALYTICS AND RAG?
------------------------------

An exact question such as "Show Kohli's record against Bumrah" needs a
deterministic lookup in player_matchups. The LLM should not calculate the
answer from memory. A contextual question such as "Summarize CSK's strengths"
can use several Gold-derived summaries, while also stating when the available
tables do not contain the requested breakdown.

The RAG corpus is created by rag/build_documents.py from player form, team,
venue, toss, and phase Gold summaries. High-cardinality player-vs-bowler rows
are intentionally queried directly rather than embedding every pair. Ollama
nomic-embed-text produces vectors. rag/vector_store.py stores them in Qdrant
with source/entity metadata and stable IDs. rag/retriever.py performs
similarity search and supports source filters.

This is retrieval from this project's Gold data, not internet search and not
a full text archive of IPL articles or every delivery.


11. CHASE MODEL
---------------

The local trainer in ml/train_chase_model.py constructs second-innings states
with five features:

  runs_required
  balls_remaining
  wickets_remaining
  current_run_rate
  required_run_rate

It trains a scikit-learn pipeline using StandardScaler and LogisticRegression.
GroupShuffleSplit assigns complete matches to either training or validation,
reducing leakage from putting deliveries of the same match on both sides. It
reports ROC-AUC and writes models/chase_model.joblib.

The prediction adapter reads feature_names_in_ from the artifact and aligns
input columns to that order. PredictionTool accepts explicit feature=value
input, checks for every required model feature, and returns a probability.
It does not guess missing live state.

The documented local fallback run reached ROC-AUC 0.877 for its grouped
validation split. This is one evaluation result, not proof of future-season
generalization. It does not reproduce the earlier approximately 0.716 result
unless the data, features, label construction, and split match. The current
model estimates a chase outcome from the live state; it does not answer a
toss-time decision alone. Player identities, pitch, weather, and other
context are not features. The trained artifact is excluded from Git.


12. STREAMLIT WORKSPACES
-----------------------

Overview
  Headline measures, franchise ranking, venue trends, innings phases, and
  batting/bowling leaderboards.

Player matchup
  Select a batter and bowler and inspect meetings, balls faced, runs, strike
  rate, dismissals, and boundary runs.

Venue & teams
  Explore venue scoring/chasing history, compare team-level results, and
  inspect toss context. Venue-wide and team-wide aggregates remain separate
  grains.

Chase prediction
  Enter a live chase state and view the estimated probability and exact model
  inputs.

Strategy assistant
  Ask natural-language questions and inspect the answer, evidence metrics,
  sources, tools used, and limitations.

Data & model
  Inspect local Gold table availability, row counts, model presence, and AI
  configuration status.


13. LOCAL SETUP
---------------

Requirements: Python 3.10 or newer, Ollama running locally, the local Gold
snapshots, and the models phi3:mini and nomic-embed-text.

From the project root in PowerShell:

  python -m venv .venv
  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m pip install -r requirements.txt
  if (-not (Test-Path .env)) { Copy-Item .env.example .env }
  ollama pull phi3:mini
  ollama pull nomic-embed-text

Build or refresh the local Qdrant index after Gold snapshots change:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m rag.vector_store

Run the app:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m streamlit run dashboard/app.py

To train the local chase model from the supplied raw files:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m ml.train_chase_model `
    --matches "data/raw/Match_Info (2).csv" `
    --deliveries "data/raw/Ball_By_Ball_Match_Data (1).csv"

The model artifact is written to models/chase_model.joblib and ignored by Git.
Raw files are also private/local and must not be committed. A pipeline refresh
requires the compatible Spark/Delta runtime and access to the configured data
Volume. The Streamlit app can run locally from the checked-in snapshots.


14. IMPORTANT FILES
-------------------

pipeline/ipl_pipeline.py
  PySpark input preparation, incremental processing, Silver, Gold, and
  reconciliation.

pipeline/quality.py
  Reusable fail-fast Spark data quality checks.

agentic/strategy_agent.py
  The active one-agent planner, routing, evidence merge, and response
  generation.

agentic/tools.py
  Deterministic Gold query wrapper and chase prediction tool.

agentic/analytics.py
  Parquet loading, canonical team/venue normalization, filters, and
  calculations.

rag/build_documents.py, rag/embeddings.py, rag/vector_store.py,
rag/retriever.py
  Gold text generation, embedding model, Qdrant indexing, and retrieval.

ml/train_chase_model.py, ml/chase_prediction.py
  Model training, evaluation, artifact loading, feature validation, and
  inference.

dashboard/app.py
  Streamlit workspace navigation, visualizations, prediction form, chat, and
  evidence trace.

agentic/agent.py
  Older deterministic analytics-agent implementation. The current Streamlit
  app loads IPLStrategyAgent from strategy_agent.py.


15. CURRENT LIMITATIONS AND NEXT DATA IMPROVEMENTS
-------------------------------------------------

  - Add a source field that explicitly identifies Super Overs and rebuild
    affected Silver/Gold outputs.
  - Verify source provenance with published checksums or a trusted manifest.
  - Add season-grained Gold outputs for year-by-year analysis.
  - Add team-by-venue aggregates for exact franchise-at-ground questions.
  - Add bowler-by-phase aggregates for death-over effectiveness questions.
  - Evaluate model calibration and temporal generalization, not only one
    match-grouped ROC-AUC.
  - Automate Gold snapshot export and RAG reindexing to prevent local copies
    from becoming stale.


Attribution
-----------

Copyright (c) 2026 @SnehaKarna. All rights reserved for project-authored code
and documentation unless a separate license is added. IPL data and third-party
packages/assets remain subject to their respective owners' terms.
